---
title: A Note on the Philosophy of Complexity
---
J.L. Austin famously said, "[O]ver-simplification is the occupational disease of philosophers." This tongue-in-cheek comment points out a profound truth that all those trained in academic philosophy understand. Austin's full comment that over-simplification is actually the profession as such is characteristically funny, but as a philosopher trained in the Greeks, it also seems to me Austin's acknowledgment that academic philosophy had abandoned the Aristotelian charge of striving to know the world as it is, oddly so often in the name of Aristotelianism itself, in favor of epistemically inadequate methods and models. The important question is not always what Aristotle, Kant, or whoever *actually wrote* but rather what they *would have written.* If our models are oversimplifications of reality, then perhaps in the name of philosophy itself we should approach the question from another point of view.

More so than ever, philosophy can be a discipline that still contributes something tangible to human knowledge, but it won't do so by reducing philosophy to a set of linguistic problems since a vast number of philosophical problems involve other forms of representations. On my view, then, oversimplification is generally the rejection of the charge to elevate the level of our thought to the complexity of the phenomena rather than to compress or reduce the phenomena to terms convenient to our models and thought. This is not a new thought to anyone in philosophy, only a brief statement of how I believe that by incorporating computational, quantitative, scientific tools with conceptual analysis, philosophy can reclaim some of its position as the *prima philosophia*. Some measure of simplification is unavoidable, but in general I seek to push computational or other models out toward the edge of what can be represented at all.

"Complex system" is a term of art. In **Introduction to the Theory of Complex Systems**, Thurner, Hanel, and Klimek define a complex system as a coevolving multilayer network of interacting entities. For example, interaction strength between elements of a complex system is denoted by:

$$
M_{ij}^\alpha(t)
$$

where $i,j$ are entities, and $\alpha$ is their relationship. Although this powerful form of representation is oftentimes scientifically valuable, the purpose of denoting 'complex systems' as the object of study is not a methodological commitment to graphs now and forever but a metaphysical characterization of the kinds of entities and processes that ought to be of philosophical interest to us.